LaToya Ruby Frazier, Edgar Thomson Plant and The Bottom, 2013, color photograph, 42 1/4 x 63 1/8”.
The photographs and text in LaToya Ruby Frazier’s first book, The Notion of Family (2014), depict the story of three generations of women—Frazier, her mother, and her grandmother—whose lives parallel the rise and decline of the steel industry in Braddock, Pennsylvania. Here, Frazier discusses her documentary photographs, which portray how the town’s industrial activities have left physical traces on the landscape and residents. Frazier’s latest exhibition “Riveted,” will be on view at the ISESE Gallery, the John L. Warfield Center for African and African American Studies, at the University of Texas at Austin from February 6 to May 6, 2015.
GRANDMA RUBY (1925–2009) witnessed Braddock’s prosperous days of department stores, theaters, and restaurants. My mother, who was born in 1959, witnessed the closing of steel mills, white flight to suburban developments, and disinvestment in our community at the local, state, and federal levels. My birth in 1982 presented me with the task of witnessing as the war on drugs decimated my family and what remained of my community.
Across the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, my grandmother, mother, and myself—a trio I perceive as one entity—are markers on a time line that represent the end of industrialization and the rise of environmental degradation, social isolation, and health care inequity—and, most recently, Rust Belt gentrification. Together we embody the shifting landscape and history of Braddock. My photographs are psychological portraits of the identity of the body and how the surrounding space shapes and forms it physically.
The underpinning element in my photographs is the collaborative process between my mother and myself. Mom is coauthor, artist, and subject. She turns the camera on me to document us. I am also the subject and content of the work. My decision to collaborate with my mother was based on a feminist viewpoint that experience should be a criterion for knowledge.
Theory becomes empty rhetoric unless it is applied to daily life and spoken in a language that people can understand. My mother did not have to read Camera Lucida to understand death in a photograph. In order to handle themes of industrialism, capitalism, environmental racism, and ecofeminism, the point of view and voice needed to come from my mother. I am dismissing the bias that only the elite and privileged can report, articulate, contextualize, and provide a creative solution for the disenfranchised subject.
My mother’s courage, strength, and creativity enabled her to make intuitive decisions about how she chose to direct shoots and document her own health and illness. Essentially, my cameras, lights, and tripods became a platform for her to exercise agency and to document our plight within the health care system. Our portraits are a visual document of health, illness, medicine, and healing, and they are buttressed by camaraderie and a will to survive. The photographs on their own have not salvaged our relationship or cured our illnesses. We do these things outside of the frame. What would be exciting would be to actually use our portraits to advocate for policy and legislation that fights discrimination against black women’s bodies, health, and illness.
The true essence and power of documentary work is its ability to reveal answers to a generation that has yet to come, or yet to ask the right questions. My relationship to the future of Braddock is best described by a line in James Baldwin’s 1962 essay “The Creative Process”: “The state of birth, suffering, love, and death are extreme states—extreme, universal, and inescapable. We all know this, but we would rather not know it. The artist is present to correct the delusions to which we fall prey in our attempts to avoid this knowledge.”
As a child in the 1980s and ’90s living on Washington Avenue, a shrinking residential street close to the Monongahela River and the Edgar Thomson plant, I always wanted to know why my grandmother and I lived at the bottom of the street and under the shadow of the steel mill—in pollution near railroad tracks and heavy truck traffic. A few years ago, the great documentary filmmaker Tony Buba, who grew up in Braddock in the ’40s and ’50s, gave me a DVD of his documentary films from the past forty years. When I watched Struggles in Steel: A Story of African-American Steelworkers (1996), I cried. The interviews and stories of black men and women, recounting their years working hard with unequal pay, which in turn affected their families financially for generations to come, was the exact answer to my question and frustration as a youth. This film explained my plight, displacement, and poverty. It helped me understand why I had been making these photographs since I was a teenager.
Permalink
Comments
