Anthony McCall, Four Projected Movements, 1975/2013. Installation view.
New York–based British artist Anthony McCall has had two artistic careers: one from 1973 to 1980, and another beginning in 2001. For the nearly twenty years in between, McCall worked as a graphic designer and editor, pursuing a different artistic trajectory. His current retrospective survey, “1970s Solid-Light Works” at Sprüth Magers in Berlin, reconsiders his earliest films, such as 1975’s Four Projected Movements, which he discusses here. The show is on view from November 22, 2013, to January 25, 2014.
FOUR PROJECTED MOVEMENTS is produced from a single fifteen-minute reel of 16-mm film. In it, a vertical plane of light is projected through the space, taking fifteen minutes to pivot downward ninety degrees until it becomes a low, horizontal plane. The projectionist then removes the take-up reel of film from the back of the projector, moves it to the front position without rewinding it, rethreads the film, and turns the projector on again. In effect, the film is now moving backward. In three-dimensional space, this produces a horizontal plane, which again then takes fifteen minutes to pivot sideways ninety degrees until it becomes a vertical plane. In the third movement, the projectionist once again moves the reel from the back to the front and rethreads the film; but this time, they give it a twist, turning the film inside out. This produces a movement similar to the first but in the opposite direction. Similarly, the fourth movement is a mirrored reverse of the second movement. If this were a conventional film, only the first movement would be “correct”; in the others, the scenes depicted would be upside down, moving in the wrong direction, or flipped back-to-front. In this kind of film, all possibilities exist as equals.
Seeing this work again in Berlin, I was suddenly struck by how important and how noticeable two things have become since the piece’s debut in 1975. The machinery of the projector appears so unfamiliar now, almost exotic. Moreover, all day long, for six weeks, and every fifteen minutes, a projectionist will change and rearrange the reels of film. The presence of the human projectionist is thus felt much more; this person becomes a central performer in the piece. In 1975, neither the projector nor the projectionist was particularly noticeable. Even the slightly shaky image produced by the 16-mm projector wasn’t so obvious then. But in the digital age, the imperfect mechanisms of the piece, including its human agency, come through. The work is perhaps more akin to a long duration performance rather than what would now be called an installation. Back in the ’70s, as a friend remarked recently, the audience probably went off, spoke to some of their friends, and had a cigarette in between reel changes. Now the reel changes are a special event—something to be watched carefully.
The invention of the haze machine also restored a possibility that I felt had vanished at the end of the ’70s when my work was shown in museums. The absence of dust and people casually smoking in the exhibition space made the volumetric dimension of the work—the blade of light—disappear altogether in the sterile galleries of the museum. When these solid-light films were first shown, the smoke emanating from the viewer’s cigarette or the dust kicked up by the viewer’s feet would activate the dimensional aspect of the work, making the viewer a participant. With the advent of this new machine, the original visibility has not only been restored, it has been enhanced. What was once glimpsed in a fragmentary way is now clearly legible across the entire installation.
The titles of the works back then were very matter-of-fact, as you would expect of that time. But my latest titles all reference the corporeal, like You and I, Breath,  Meeting You Halfway, Leaving, and Face to Face. They are descended from the earlier works yet have undergone a shift in orientation. How far can you render an idea down until you have something irreducible? That question has led me to the idea that a form as simple as a line of light can represent both the body and the observer.

Permalink
Comments
