Stills from “Šejla Kamerić’s Ab uno disce omnes (From One, Learn All), 2015, digital video, color, sound.
Šejla Kamerić, who grew up in Sarajevo while the city was under siege during the Bosnian War in the first half of the 1990s, has in recent decades created films, photography, and installations that focus on her experiences and memories of the war. Her latest exhibition, “When the Heart Goes Bing Bam Boom,” is currently on display at Arter in Istanbul through February 28, 2016, and presents a wide selection of Kamerić’s work made over the past fifteen years.
WE DO EXIST ONLY IN MEMORY. Just after the war, and at the beginning of my career, I was very much focused on what had just happened to me. I needed to understand and reflect immediately on what was going on, which led to works such as Bosnian Girl, 2003, but also later films such as Glück, 2010, and 1395 Days Without Red, 2011, which engage with the war in a sublimated way, starting from my personal memories. Ab uno disce omnes (From One, Learn All), 2015, which is included in this exhibition, has a completely different approach. I wanted to instead use forensic methods. It began as an academic data-gathering mission: a meticulous process much like the methodology of medical research, where information is comprehensively collected, cross-checked, analyzed, and systematically categorized. Other steps included gathering the evidence: going to the sites where atrocities happened, morgues, DNA labs; studying satellite images or maps; retrieving lists of missing persons; and collecting testimonies. The work is conceived as a continually evolving open source database that exists both as a multimedia installation and as an online project. I imagine it as a living memorial, made out of data.
This piece is a never-ending process. The footage is presented in the installation through randomly selected and reshuffled short videos. At the moment there are more than thirty-three thousand clips included—this means it is nearly impossible to see the same thing over again. It is about how a society that was responsible for archiving this time and making the information available to the public completely failed. Not providing access to information is a political strategy; it is a policy of forgetting rather than remembering. There are two very different modes in Bosnia: people who wish to ignore everything about the war, and people who are completely obsessed with it. Those two sides sometimes clash, but more often they exist in parallel, and both are paralyzing our society.
Media, including television, were helpful during the war, with reporters carrying cameras on the front lines. It was a special moment in the history of journalism, as for the first time it was twenty-four-hour coverage—a live war. CNN, BBC, and other networks did not know how to handle the images of massacre on the streets; at first they only played the sounds without showing the images. Things have changed a lot since then. Nothing is sacred, nothing is shocking anymore. We get to see every possible horrible image, all through the media. But this doesn’t make the world a better place; it does not mean that we are more engaged just because we see more. In a way, just hearing the sound of the massacres created more horror than seeing the beheadings or executions broadcast does nowadays. Even if you are able to process all the data, it is still a question whether and how you can understand it. That is why for Ab uno disce omnes I had to create a new way to perceive this information. The vast data collected needed to be summarized in a way that would lead one to get more deeply and emotionally involved with the subject in a short period, but at the same time get a sense of what it would be like to experience the war personally. This is the first and biggest step toward engaging with a subject: feeling empathy.
Permalink
Comments
