Left: Magnus Plessen, Ohne Titel (6) (Untitled [6]), 2014, oil on canvas, 38 x 30”. Right: Magnus Plessen, Ohne Titel (7) (Untitled [7]), 2014, oil on canvas, 38 x 30”.
The German painter Magnus Plessen, known for historically trenchant figurative paintings with rigid, lateral brushwork, has spent more than a decade thinking about a book of photographs—the pacifist Ernst Friedrich’s War Against War (1924), which depicts mutilated survivors of World War I with biting frankness rather than patriotic valor. The book serves as the starting point for Plessen’s exhibition “1914,” curated by Katy Siegel, which is on view at the Rose Art Museum until December 21, 2014. It evokes the centenary of the Great War not only through the artist’s coarsened and disjunctive paintings but also through early facial prosthetics, plaster life masks of wounded soldiers, and photographs of casualties lent from the Smithsonian in Washington and the Imperial War Museum in London.
WAR AGAINST WAR was the first published work to show the devastating destruction of automatic weapons on the human body. The loss of one’s face was the most severe of all battlefield injuries, as it meant a loss of identity. The photos were so horrible that I could hardly look at them. I never thought that I could add anything to this material, as it speaks for itself. But I could also never forget the portraits of soldiers looking at you, their faces blown apart by grenades.
My work was very analytical for a long time, focusing on the material and the imaginary properties of images. By setting up rules that were unpractical in the context of a painting, I tried to materialize inner images in a nonillusionistic way. Once I had set these rules I followed them. For instance: only allowing myself to make straight brush marks, or trying to paint the underside of the brushstroke, or substituting my own brushstroke through masking tape to standardize the width of my brush mark. I took measurements with masking tape, like a tailor, from my wife Sarah's body when she was pregnant with our first son Hugo; then I applied these measurements onto the canvas. This led to awkward figures, as three-dimensional volume was placed directly on the pictorial plane without the mediation of perspective.
I read an interesting article on quantum theory recently. It pointed out that quantum theory makes it necessary to say goodbye to thinking that there is some external reality which human science can explore, like a territory. The article went on to quote from an obituary of Niels Bohr: “It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how nature is. Physics concerns what we can say about nature.” This is also true for history. In his fantastic book The Sleepwalkers (2012), Christopher Clark succeeds in describing the events that led to World War I from multiple viewpoints, which makes you understand how complex the political systems of the time were, and how challenging it was for the protagonists to act and react in this system of different nations in a global economy. (Clark points out that it took until the 1980s to bring international relations back to the level of 1914.) They certainly didn’t think that their decisions would lead inevitably to war. This breaking with inevitableness which so many historians have ascribed to the outbreak of World War I feels so much closer to an understanding of the time before 1914.
This made me think of the death of painting, and my own rigidity as a painter. I sometimes think that I fought to occupy a niche in art history—a corner that had been overlooked by others. There are, however, only a very few things that a painter can find when aiming for something undiscovered or completely new. What I find restraining about this concept is that you have to locate this undiscoveredness in a space, which is by definition limited. I feel it is necessary to embrace life as a contradictory complexity, rather than to exclude multiple viewpoints for the sake of a single art-historical perspective.
Permalink
Comments
