View of “Zhang Enli: Space Painting,” 2013.
Currently based in Shanghai, Zhang Enli grew up in the provincial town of Jilin, Manchuria, and is well known for his interest in the materiality of painting. His ongoing “Space Paintings” series, begun in 2010, consists of full-scale frescoes covering the floors and walls of whichever room he is working within. In 2012, for the Kochi-Muziris Biennale in Kerala, India, he created a “Space Painting” that evoked the vivid colors of the Hindu festival of Holi. Enli speaks here about his most recent “Space Painting,” for the ICA London, which is on view until December 22, 2013.
WHEN I PAINT THESE SPACES, I paint them in order to invite people in—to let all people enter and become immersed in the atmosphere. I have used artificial light since the beginning, so that I can manipulate them and change how it affects the painting. But the real point of the “Space Painting” is not necessarily how it looks, or whether or not it is organic or manipulated, but how it ultimately makes you feel in your heart. Human beings are too concerned with notions of authenticity: what is real and what is fake—what makes something real in the first place.
As I begin each “Space Painting,” I think about how it relates to the city I’m in. I consider the city, or village, as well as the entire country. Cities in the world may be very similar in a lot of ways, but each has its own small differences. I think about the tiny details, and try to capture those. When I painted in Kochi, for the Kochi-Muziris Biennale, I saw so many amazing colors just while going about my everyday life that I felt I had to translate those into my piece. So the Kochi work is vivid, capturing those colors specific to India. But even then they are nonspecific. People come into my paintings, and each individual has their own personal experience; everybody sees something different. The painting comes to reflect the viewer’s personal life and interact with their personal space.
Ancient Chinese frescoes have influenced me a lot. In traditional Chinese painting the artist does not have a plan, and this is something that I try to follow. Instead, they begin the work with nothing but an idea in their mind, and as they paint the composition takes shape. There are no corrections, no changes. The act of painting is remarkably slow; it may appear as though it was painted very quickly, but everything is done slowly and carefully. As an artist, all of your power is in how well you can control your hands. This is how I work. After you have completed the painting in this way, very delicately and very slowly, you can see that although the painting was very light, in that lightness is the work’s strength. You can see that it is very powerful.
In London, I commuted back and forth from my hotel to the ICA for nine days. I painted about one thousand square feet of the space each day until all nine thousand square feet of it were completed. When the viewer walks into this huge painting, I want them to feel its diversity: large areas of overall colors, the detailed brushstrokes, and traces of my previous motifs like iron wires and leather tubing. I felt the city every day during my commute to the space and I’m sure it left an impression on me, particularly the colors I saw. But as I was on the verge of painting each day, I forgot what I had conceived before. The action of painting superseded any concept I had of the city, though my memory of it was at the start of this daily process.
When I was younger, I used to paint objects I could find around me, just things that I found either outside or around my studio. I have become much more introspective now. As you grow older you find you don’t want to express what is happening externally as much; now I don’t work from found objects, but rather from memories, or thoughts I have. A lot of my paintings, although specific to their particular environment, also reflect the body itself; the “Space Paintings” mimic the body as it contains you, like a cocoon. But most of all, instead of what’s outside of myself, my paintings now reflect what’s in my heart.
Permalink
Comments
