Left: Cover of Maggie Nelson’s The Argonauts (2015). Right: The Arroyo Seco, Los Angeles.
Maggie Nelson is the author of Women, the New York School, and Other True Abstractions (2007);  Bluets (2009); and The Art of Cruelty: A Reckoning (2011), among other books. Her latest volume,  The Argonauts (2015), pushes at the elasticity of language and form, family and identity, corporeality and social convention. It was published this month by Graywolf Press.
I HAVE always hated our almost rote propensity to shovel each other into premade life-shapes. I think that’s part of what’s made this book a little painful to see reflected back to me—I can sometimes palpably feel the tension in the reviewer or whomever between needing to create a life-shape and shovel me into it (“becoming a mother,” etc.) and allowing the text to perform its implosions and explosions of identity. People really worry about what will happen if you pull the plug on fixed identities in this way, but they shouldn’t worry so much—in my experience, that’s when good things start to happen.
For a long time, this book wore an epigraph from Roland Barthes. In it, Barthes says that in his own writing, there are always two different texts—Text I, “reactive,” paranoid; and Text II, “active, moved by pleasure.” I put it at the book’s opening to remind myself, each time I opened the document, that it was OK to write in both a reactive and active mode. Because often I would judge my reactive mode as simply grumpy, defensive, combative, unpleasant to read. I would cajole myself: Get to Text II, get to the pleasure! But Barthes then goes on to say that as his work gets “written, corrected, accommodated to the fiction of Style, Text I becomes active too, whereupon it loses its reactive skin, which subsists only in patches (mere parentheses).” I really wanted that to happen here—I really wanted Text I to bleed into Text II, so that whatever warlike aspect was present, it wouldn’t fight with the “pleasure” part; their skin would conjoin, like a Mobius strip.
There’s a corollary here to Eve Sedgwick’s interest in the relation between paranoia and reparative practice; The Argonauts quotes her line about how often it is “the most paranoid-tending people who are able to, and need to, develop and disseminate the richest reparative practices.” This book is rich in action and reaction, in paranoia and reparation. I wouldn’t even say it vacillates between them—it’s almost performing them in a strobe.
The interweaving of my partner Harry’s words into the text at first was just kind of a whim, or a problem solver—I wanted to tell the story of his mother’s death, and I knew he had written it more beautifully than I could ever paraphrase, so why not just use his. But once it occurred to me to weave his words in, it suddenly seemed utterly necessary. It performs a kind of endgame interpenetration of the text that the book’s wagers about interdependency and intersubjectivity seemed to invite, or even demand. It suddenly felt necessary, in a text that talks to and about him so much, to pause for a moment and let the reader feel the force of his own words, not his represented words or represented self as utilized by me.
Of course I’m still utilizing his narrative in service of my own, but I think the power of his words acts like a breeze (or a wind, really) in the room—a reminder of the separateness, the specificity, of others, as well as our conjoinedness. It’s the part of the book that makes me cry every time I read it aloud, probably because the words aren’t mine. He’s testifying to something I have never experienced—watching his mother die—but he’s also testifying to something he didn’t experience, death. It made sense to me to pair that with my own testimony of something he witnessed but didn’t literally experience—my labor with our son. We are deeply with each other, perhaps we even are each other, in some material or spiritual way, but we also stand apart. Whether that apartness is illusion or reality I cannot say. But I wanted to get at the question, the wonder of it, the tragedy of it, and so on.
I do believe in incantation. My account of taking walks in the Arroyo Seco during late pregnancy while listing aloud the names of everyone who was waiting on earth to love my son as a means of luring him out is a primary example of how we might perform a spiritual reverence for the word, for names, even while understanding deeply how fucked up or limiting words or names can be. This brings us to the book’s opening wager, from Wittgenstein, that the inexpressible is contained, albeit inexpressibly, in the expressed. Skilled as one may be as a writer or artist, I don’t really believe one can ever be in total control of that inexpressible thing. You’re in charge of the expressed. As Wittgenstein noted, when we try to control or directly express the inexpressible, we get into trouble. We might not literally be able to call something into being. But we can always sing.
Permalink
Comments
