View of “Gianni Piacentino. Works 1965-2014,” 2014.
The sculptural and wall-based work of Italian artist Gianni Piacentino is based around ideas of speed, branding, and industrial aesthetics. In spite of (often inadvertently) sharing ground with Minimalism and Pop art, Piacentino’s practice has defied categorization since his early, fraught association with Arte Povera in the 1960s. His work is partly inspired by his lifelong love of motorbikes, which gave rise to the streamlined vehicle sculptures he is best known for. Here he talks about his current exhibition (curated by Andrea Bellini) at VW (VeneKlasen/Werner) in Berlin, which is on view from September 17 to November 8, 2014.
THE EARLIEST WORKS in the show are from a time when a few Italian artists, in particular Giulio Paolini, were trying to go beyond painting. It started from a question: “OK, this is the frame. What shall we do with it?” I love concrete things, so I wanted to see how the canvas is made. I used to have my frames specially made thicker by a carpenter. Technique is important. This is how my Minimalist sculptures came out in 1965–66, which are the earliest works in the show.
In 1967, after breaking off with the Arte Povera group, I took a rest and started restoring a motorbike—a stunning Indian from the 1930s. While I was restoring it, I had an epiphany. I decided I wanted to put my life, and all my passions, into my work. Up till then, with my minimal structures, I’d had the feeling that I’d somehow done an academic work, linked to the history of art as the development and invention of new styles. So I wondered: “Why not do other things?” and that’s when the first prototypes appeared—models of vehicles, wings.
My work is about minimal form, finish-fetish culture, motorbikes, and the passion for very particular colors. I started with unusual colors in the late ’60s: matte metallic, pearl, and iridescent colors. I am fascinated by the aesthetics of technology, especially in connection with the idea of speed.
I can do professional body car painting, metal polishing, light engineering myself, though sometimes I need to use specialized workshops. When an artwork is emotionally cold it is important to control it physically. It is too easy to make an industrial object.
Motorbikes are an important part of my life. From 1967 to now I have driven very fast motorcycles. Illegal speed is normal for me. I was also a professional racer, although as the “passenger” in the sidecar class, in the ’70s. And I still drive a very fast Aprilia 1000 RSV4 Factory (an SBK model with 186 HP, 296 km/h) and a KTM 690 Supermoto. I drive it every Saturday around 11 AM, I always do the same trip. To go really fast you must know every inch of the road where you are driving.
Permalink
Comments
