
 


 
Japanese  photographer  Yamamoto  Masao  (b.  1957)  is  a  Zen  poet  of  the  medium.  His  images  focus  on  the  body  and  the  natural  world,  subjects  pared  down  to  their  essence,  at  once  ordinary  and  extraordinary.  Yamamoto’s  publications  and  installations  have  tended  to  reinforce  a  sense  of  continuity  between  part  and  earthly  whole,  the  specific  moment  and  the  duration,  by  presenting  images  in  close  combination  with  one  another.  He  has  printed  them  in  clusters  on  a  single  long  scroll  or  hanging,  unframed,  in  rhythmic  sequences  across  the  wall,  occupying  the  entire  space  from  floor  to  ceiling,  corner  to  corner.  His  unpredictable  assembly  and  composition  of  photographs  exhibited  in  a  variety  of  formats,  tonalities  and  sizes—mostly  quite  small  (down  to  one  inch  across)—trigger  alertness,  an  observant  presentness  that  serves  the  pictures  well. Images  in  Yamamoto’s  latest  exhibition,  “KAWA=Flow,”  resonate  harmoniously  with  what  came  before,  but  here  the  artist  reverted  to  a  conventional  method  of  display,  hanging  the  11  photographs  in  frames  at  eye  level,  at  standard  intervals.  Ironically,  considering  the  show’s  title,  the  installation  de-emphasized  the  temporal  stream  uniting  all  things.  Yamamoto  proffered  a  succession  of  discrete  moments,  whose  common  stillness  and  grace  served  to  bind  them  fundamentally,  if  not  lyrically.  Each  of  the  prints  (all  gelatin  silver,  untitled  and  undated,  ranging  from  4 3/4 to  13  inches  on  a  side)  is  a  pristine  and  quiet  celebration,  an  act  of  recognition  and  reverence.In  one  picture  a  log  appears  newly  split  on  the  chopping  block,  opened  toward  us  like  a  book  with  its  pale  interior  exposed.  In  others,  a  spotted  deer  nests  in  a  bed  of  ferns,  delicate  mushrooms  sprout  from  a  stretch  of  rope,  a  dragonfly’s  wings  glisten  with  minute  beads  of  dew  and  a  dark  bird  capping  the  tip  of  a  leafless  vertical  branch  completes  an  inverted  exclamation  point.  In  one  particularly  exquisite  piece,  three  white  cherry  blossoms  align  in  a  neat  column,  while  the  pale  oval  faces  of  the  tree’s  sawed  branches  seem  to  progress  like  phases  of  the  moon  in  an  arc  across  the  left  side  of  the  dark  page.Yamamoto’s  closest  philosophic  kin  might  be  Japan’s  20th-century  Zen  painters,  whose  sparely  brushed  images  and  phrases  were  meant  as  prods  to  enlightenment,  zingers  to  awaken  our  drowsy  consciousness.  Oddly,  perhaps,  his  work  also  brings  to  mind  the  contemplative  rambles  of  Richard  Long,  a  solitary  soul  moving  through  space  and  time,  and,  less  surprisingly,  because  of  the  composer’s  own  deep  connection  to  Zen  Buddhism,  the  silence-soaked  compositions  of  John  Cage.  Yamamoto’s  photographs  invite  clarity  and  gratitude.  Their  purity  is  timeless  but  ever  timely.
Photo: Yamamoto Masao: Untitled, n.d., gelatin silver print, 9 3⁄4 by 6 1⁄4 inches; at Craig Krull.



