
 


 
After  spending  almost  a  decade  in  Belgium,  it  was  a  sad  stroke  of  fate—his  mother’s  terminal  illness  and  death—that  repatriated  the  Dutch  artist  Gabriel  Lester  (b.  1972),  known  for  his  films,  performances  and  installations  incorporating  light  and  sound.  Shortly  after  his  return  to  the  Netherlands  in  2008,  he  was  invited  to  mount  an  exhibition  at  the  Boijmans  Van  Beuningen,  a  request  that  resulted  in  “Suspension  of  Disbelief,”  his  first  museum  solo,  which  opened  at  the  same  time  as  the  country’s  most  important  annual  art  fair,  Art  Rotterdam.  This  exhibition  consists  of  15  works—including  a  light  installation,  a  slide  projection,  sculptures  and  a  film—stretching  through  two  large,  dimly  lit,  ground-floor  galleries,  which  come  together  to  create  an  absorbing  and  enchanting  environment.Throughout  the  show,  Lester  explores  fortune  and  misfortune,  fate,  belief  and  expectation.  The  first  gallery  pre-sents  How  to  Act (2011)—a  piece  that  the  artist  has  remade  on  numerous  occasions  since  his  student  days  at  Amsterdam’s  Rijksakademie  over  10  years  ago.  Flashes  of  pale  green,  light  blue,  red  and  yellow  light  are  projected  onto  an  otherwise  empty  white  wall,  accompanied  by  a  dramatic  musical  score.  The  colored  light  bounces  off  the  wall  onto  several  nondescript  potted  plants  nearby,  suggesting  the  experience  of  observing  the  light  of  a  TV  set  through  a  window.  Given  these  minimal  means,  the  viewer  is  left  on  his  own  to  remember  and  imagine  any  number  of  scenarios  and  narratives.A  series  of  waist-high,  cube-shaped  sculptures  on  wheels  was  placed  along  the  route  through  the  atrium  to  the  second  space.  Despite  the  sloping  floor,  the  objects  are  static,  as  if  caught  in  mid-slide;  the  installation  mimics,  to  use  the  artist’s  words,  “a  roll  of  dice.”  Dimmed  spotlights  cleverly  direct  the  viewer’s  gaze  past  Richard  Serra’s  monumental  Waxing  Arcs (1980)—a  piece  in  the  museum’s  permanent  collection—to  various  small-scale  sculptures  by  Lester.  The  Probable  Composition  of  an  Improbable  Rockslide  in  the  Dutch  Mountains (2011),  a  20-inch-wide  diorama,  presents  a  road  at  the  bottom  of  a  cliff.  A  car  has  just  been  hit  by  a  rockslide,  an  unlikely  situation  in  one  of  the  world’s  flattest  countries.  Together  with  other  sculptures,  it  reiterates  the  theme  of  misfortune.The  Big  One (2011),  a  17-minute  film  that  takes  place  in  a  theater  with  plush  red  seating  and  a  well-dressed  audience,  is  Lester’s  latest  work  and  the  focal  point  of  the  second  space.  It  is  projected  onto  a  large  screen  with  a  xylophone-and-trumpet  audio  track  recalling  eerie  amusement-park  music.  The  music  is  interrupted  by  occasional  clapping  and  distant-sounding  announcements  by  an  agitated  MC,  played  by  the  artist.  In  one  scene,  he  wears  a  black  suit  and  bowler  hat,  both  covered  in  white  numbers.  As  if  on  a  surreal  bingo  night,  numbers  and  letters  are  chosen  by  a  giant  rotating  number  generator  installed  in  the  high  domelike  ceiling.  As  the  machine  slows  to  a  halt,  the  camera  captures  close-ups  of  expectant  faces.  This  buildup  of  dramatic  tension,  which  recurs  in  other  dreamlike  scenes,  never  reaches  a  climax  and  is  never  released.Photo: Gabriel Lester: The Big One, 2011, film, 17 minutes; at the Boijmans Van Beuningen.



