
 


 
Before  Richard  Tsao  considers  a  painting  ready  to  leave  his  studio,  he  takes  it  through  a  process  that  is  not  unlike  nature’s  millennial  buildup  of  sediment  to  form  solid  rock  mass.  However,  Tsao’s  color-saturated,  highly  textured  pieces  on  wood  or  canvas—accretions  concocted  of  acrylic  paint,  water,  marble  dust,  acrylic  matte  medium  and  small  amounts  of  fabric  dye  pigment—require  decisive  intervention  with  an  eye  for  fortuitious  accident,  and  a  mere  two-to-three-year  gestation  period.  Much  has  been  made  of  their  genesis,  of  the  buckets  of  water  and  whisked  soup  that  get  poured,  thrown,  splashed,  flung,  sprayed  and  flicked  onto  or  ricocheted  off  works  in  progress  stacked  on  the  floor  or  leaning  against  the  wall.  These  actions  are  repeated  over  time,  and  the  pieces  are  left  to  marinate  in  pools  of  color  and  then  set  aside  to  dry.  It  all  happens  in  the  “Flood  Room,”  a  special  enclosure  in  the  artist’s  studio  that  has  been  written  about  and  filmed.  But  preoccupation  with  the  backstory  tends  to  hijack  focus  away  from  the  artworks  themselves,  and  each  of  the  dozen  compelling  paintings  (all  but  one  completed  in  2010)  featured  in  Tsao’s  recent  exhibition  at  Art  Projects  International  has  its  own  story  to  tell. Avalanche (14  by  38  inches)  emits  a  cool  felicity  that  disguises  the  mayhem  of  its  making.  A  matte  white  paint  spill  envelops  most  of  the  piece’s  surface.  It  seems  to  flow  out  from  the  center,  thinning  to  a  splatter  at  the  edges  and  there  revealing  buried  layers  of  cerulean  blue,  gray,  yellow  and  bits  of  red.  The  granulated,  milky  substance  covers  raised  bits  of  flotsam  that,  when  seen  up  close,  evoke  small  heads  frozen  in  time,  their  expressive  quality  recalling  Mary  Frank’s  clay  figures  of  the  1970s.  It  seems  that  they  utter  silent  cries,  as  if  overwhelmed  by  the  masses  of  falling  matter  suggested  by  the  title.Tsao’s  pieces  rarely  conform  to  their  original  rectangular  supports.  Areas  of  paint  that  have  spilled  over  the  edges  form  rocky  perimeters,  which  sometimes  hang  off  in  jagged  chunks.  The  diptych  Sun  and  Surf (19  by  28  inches)  displays  evocative  negative  shapes  and  shadows  between  its  canvases  as  a  result  of  their  irregular  contours.  Viewed  from  the  side,  some  works  disclose  the  layers  of  their  making.  For  instance,  Avalanche offers  an  entirely  different  experience  of  the  painting  in  the  riot  of  juicy  colors  that  underlie  its  surface.   Next  Rain,  about  the  same  size  as  Avalanche,  stands  out  from  the  others.  Here  Tsao  allows  an  intense  red  to  dominate  the  ground,  while  violently  interwoven  yellow  and  white  skeins  pelt  the  picture  plane  like  a  driving  rain  against  a  windshield.  In  trying  to  capture  “a  moment  in  time  that  is  forever,”  which  the  artist  told  me  is  one  of  his  goals,  we  hear  an  elegiac  lament  for  the  transience  of  all  things.Above: Richard Tsao, Avalanche, 2010, water-based mixed media on wood, 14 by 38 inches; at Art Projects International, New York.



