
 


 
There  were  just  five  George  McNeil  paintings  in  Perlow’s  tiny  space  this  winter,  but  even  this  small  number  made  me  wishfor  a  full-on  museum  exhibition  of  this  underknown  artist.  The  paintings  date  to  the  1970s  and  1980s,  decades  in  which  the  New  Yorker  McNeil  (1908-1995),who  became  an  abstractionist  in  the  late’30s  and  achieved  renown  as  a  second-generation  Abstract  Expressionist  in  the  ’50s  and  ’60s,  turned  to  a  wild  figuration  that  had  affinities  with  that  of  the  East  Village  and  Neo-Expressionist  painters.  They  were  young  and  he  was  old,  but  he  had  the  advantage  in  that  he  had  little  to  work  out.  Having  fully  assimilated  the  muscularity  and  adventurousness  of  postwar  abstraction,  he  could  simply  have  a  ball.Maybe  that’s  one  reason  that,  in  the  ’80s,  he  did  a  series  of  paintings  and  prints  with  a  disco  theme.  There  were  two  here:  Dazzling  Disco  #2 (1984),  with  its  muddled  crowd  and  garish,  masklike  colored  faces,  and  Dingbat  Disco (1982),  focusing  on  just  two  figures  heatedly  dancing.  At  around  4½  by  5  feet,  this  oil  on  canvas  is  thick  with  impasto  and  added  materials—sand  and  twine—that,  along  with  the  primitivist,  childlike  facture  and  forceful  brushwork,  puts  one  in  mind  of  Art  Brut.  The  woman  has  bright  yellow  arms  and  a  brown  face;  she  thrusts  one  big  pink  leg  over  a  tough  wedge  of  blue.  She  looks  one  way  while  her  partner,  his  head  outlined  in  vivid  orange,  looks  the  other.  The  dance  seems  merely  an  excuse  for  the  artist  to  give  some  nameable  shape  to  the  dynamic  trajectories  of  his  earlier  nonobjective  compositions—but  something  of  the  cocaine-stoked  mania  of  the  era  has  also  made  its  way  into  the  work.I  wish  I  knew  what  was  going  on  in  Are  You  Sure? (1984),  another  large  painting  in  which  the  presence  of  a  long,  disembodied  arm  with  a  watch  and  two  rather  anxious-looking  heads  suggests  an  ominous  narrative  with  a  looming  curfew.  The  toothy  blue  head  at  the  center  of  the  painting  reminds  me  of  figures  by  Dana  Schutz  and  some  recent  “portraits”  by  Nicole  Eisenman,  similarly  recalling  Dubuffet,  and  makes  me  feel  that  the  right  context  for  McNeil  could  matter  to  younger  artists  who  may  not  be  familiar  with  his  expressive  intensity  and  humor.  A  smaller  painting  on  paper  mounted  to  panel  (approx.  27  by  28  inches),  Peter’s  Dream  Image,  features  another  big,  multicolored  head,  its  spiky  punkish  hair  aflame  in  pink  and  blue.An  earlier  painting  is  less  raucous:  Holiday  (1973)  presents  a  distended,  bleach-blonde  blue  nude  nested  in  a  hot  orange  ground—no  light,  but  plenty  of  sun.  At  the  height  of  second-wave  feminism,  McNeil  cut  off  the  cranium  and  made  the  mouth  and  pubic  area  a  flaming  red.  At  the  time,  painters  like  Baselitz  were  just  making  their  way  into  U.S.  galleries  and  museums,  but  his  German  angst  had  no  edge  over  McNeil’s  canny  American  lyricism.  Once  again,  alas,  market  fashion  prevailed.Photo: George McNeil: Dazzling Disco #2, 1984, oil, sand and twine on canvas, 64 by 72 inches; at Katharina Rich Perlow.



