
 


 
Luc  Delahaye  made  a  name  for  himself  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  as  a  photojournalist.  Parachuting  into  hotspots  ranging  from  Chechnya  and  Bosnia  to  Afghanistan  and  Rwanda,  he  tirelessly  catalogued  the  horrors  of  armed  conflict.  The  treacherousness  of  working  in  such  war  zones  conditioned  his  approach  to  his  medium,  as  he  recounted  in  a  2003  interview  with  Artnet.com:  “I  felt  clearly  and  entirely  present  in  the  world  for  almost  the  first  time;  you  have  this  very  clear  and  simple  understanding  of  things.”  Unsatisfied  with  the  sensationalistic  storytelling  endemic  to  most  photojournalism  and  determined  to  keep  himself  anchored  in  the  here  and  now,  Delahaye  began  a  decade  ago  to  wield  his  camera  to  artistic  ends,  while  continuing  to  chronicle  pockets  of  social  unrest  across  the  globe.  Despite  his  shift  in  purpose,  the  results  remain  predominantly  documentary.In  this  exhibition,  “2006-2010,”  Delahaye  presented  his  radically  abridged  output  from  the  last  four  years.  (An  inexorable  perfectionist,  he  culls  very  few  usable  images  from  his  perilous  expeditions  abroad.)  The  10  imposing  color  C-prints  (ranging  from  about  59  to  118  inches  on  a  side)  and  the  one  modest  black-and-white  inkjet  photo  (12  by  9  inches)  on  view  narrated  both  collective  suffering  and  resistance.Other  than  their  descriptive  titles,  almost  nothing  in  Delahaye’s  striking  tableaux  reveals  where  they  were  taken.  Man  Sleeping, Dubai (2008)  shows  a  weathered  male  migrant  worker  slumbering  in  the  sands  of  the  emirate  with  towering  electrical  pylons  and  industrial  smokestacks  looming  in  the  background.  Does  the  nameless  Endymion-like  figure  bespeak  the  underbelly  of  such  bling-bling  Middle  Eastern  oases,  where  foreign  laborers  are  ruthlessly  exploited?  The  Glue  Sniffer,  The  Looters,  The  Thief and Camp  Texaco,  Port-au-Prince all  were  taken  in  Haiti  in  January  2010,  days  after  a  catastrophic  earthquake  devastated  the  already  stricken  country.  True  to  his  journalistic  roots,  Delahaye  captured  the  depths  to  which  most  locals  stooped  to  cope—substance  abuse,  burglary,  larceny,  insalubrious  encampments—suggesting  that  such  responses  to  extreme  conditions  are  part  and  parcel  of  human  nature.Showcasing  a  similar  tragedy,  Karni  Crossing  Demo (2008)  depicts  a  raucous  throng  of  Palestinian  men  and  boys  protesting  the  Israeli  blockade  of  Gaza.  Those  in  the  distance  brandish  Palestinian  flags  like  battle  standards,  as  they  advance  along  the  fenced-off  border.  In  the  foreground,  others  usher  a  child  to  safety,  scrutinize  the  enemy  from  atop  mounds  of  dirt  and  prepare  for  confrontation  under  the  sweltering  sun. Shot  from  far-off,  occasionally  elevated  vantage  points  but  replete  with  saturated  colors,  Delahaye’s  outsized  photographs  engulf  the  viewer,  inviting  close  scrutiny  of  myriad  details.  Their  clarity  and  detached  non-voyeuristic  tenor  can  be  compared  to  the  panoramic  creations  of  Andreas  Gursky.  While  the  latter  concentrates  on  architecture  and  landscape  to  interrogate  contemporary  capitalism  and  globalization,  both  photographers  shun  gratuitous  sentimentality  or  political  grandstanding.  Delahaye’s  faithful  recordings  of  human  drama  thrive  at  the  crossroads  of  historical  reality  and  esthetic  engagement.Photo: Luc Delahaye: Man Sleeping, Dubai, 2008, digital C-print, 118 by 923⁄4  inches; at Nathalie Obadia.



