
 


 
The  17  works  in  Ann  Shostrom’s  exhibition,  her  first  in  New  York  in  18  years,  are  collectively  called  “Harvest.”  They  might  be  thought  of  as  a  harvest  of  internalized  ideas  operating  in  painting  for  as  many  years  or  more.  In  these  works—essentially  collages—Shostrom  layers  fabrics  in  unstretched  yardage.  Sometimes  she  paints  on  her  piecemeal  surfaces,  but  seldom  in  a  painterly  manner;  more  often  she  is  reiterating  or  disrupting  something  in  the  found  textiles.  At  times  it’s  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the  preexisting  patterns  and  those  invented  or  altered  by  the  artist.  Looming  large  is  the  spirit  of  Robert  Rauschenberg’s  mid-1970s  “Jammer”  series,  and  there  are  echoes  as  well  of  Pattern  and  Decoration.Shostrom  takes  compositional  cues  from  her  methods.  She  seems  to  be  repairing  and  augmenting,  obscuring  and  revealing  as  she  goes.  There  is  also  in  her  procedure  a  feeling  of  personal  ritual.  Rectangles  of  opaque  fabric  are  overlaid  with  others  that  are  semitransparent.  Inserts  of  square  and  irregularly  shaped  swatches,  appliqués,  embroidery  and  printed  fabrics  all  play  a  role.  She  also  uses  a  wax-resist  method  of  coloration  (similar  to  batik),  sometimes  to  stunning  effect.  In  addition  to  the  classic  formalist  device  of  always  referencing  the  edge  with  her  many  rectangles,  she  incorporates  what  appear  to  be  photo-transfers  and  a  freewheeling  kind  of  calligraphic  marking  to  complicate  her  iconography,  which  includes,  here  and  there,  a  graffiti-style  heart  and  a  butterfly.The  simplest  pieces,  compositionally,  are  often  the  most  rewarding.  At  the  left  edge  of  Satori (62  by  56  inches,  2010)  is  a  narrow  rectangle  consisting  of  a  dark  camouflage  pattern.  A  broader  rectangle,  placed  centrally,  is  of  a  medium-value  gray,  and  a  medium-width  rectangle  to  the  right  is  a  transparent  fabric  with  little  bunches  of  floral  embroidery  pattern  over  a  solid  purple  textile,  producing  a  pale  mauve.  An  oval  of  the  batik  effect  toward  the  top  is  somewhat  subdued  by  a  transparent  overlay.  Also  present  are  a  few  watery  Rorschach-blotlike  stains  and  some  dark  markings  calligraphically  mimicking  the  fabric  patterns.  Satori feels  as  Asian  as  its  title.Quite  different  in  execution  and  effect  is  Insurgency (68  by  116  inches,  2006),  which  plays  a  broad  partial  border  of  black,  gray  and  white  camouflage-patterned  fabric  off  two  central  rectangles  in  black,  orange  and  yellow.  Irregular  holes  are  torn  or  burned  into  the  larger,  blacker  central  rectangle  and  the  fiery  orange  and  yellow  areas  surrounding  it.  A  mostly  orange,  fat  rectangle  with  more  signs  of  combustion  is  balanced  by  three  slim,  shiny  brocade  and  satin  rectangles.  The  work  presents  a  vista  of  chaos  and  implied  destruction.Shostrom  can  obviously  achieve  vastly  different  effects.  One  wonders  if  it  will  be  the  simplicity  and  serenity  of  Satori or  the  noisy  mayhem  of  Insurgency that  prevails  in  the  future.Photo: Ann Shostrom: Satori, 2010, cotton, acrylic, embroidery and mixed mediums, 62 by 56 inches; at Elizabeth Harris.



