
 


“The  Deconstructive  Impulse:  Women  Artists  Reconfigure  Signs  of  Power,  1973–1991,”  organized  by  Helaine  Posner  and  Nancy  Princenthal  for  the  Neuberger  Museum,  is  a  highly  entertaining  and  groundbreaking  exhibition  that  should  be  required  viewing  for  anyone  interested  in  the  evolution  of  contemporary  art.  The  curators  propose  a  new  narrative  arc  for  the  transition  from  modernism  to  postmodernism,  featuring  well-known  works  by  22  artists,  among  them  Dara  Birnbaum,  Sarah  Charlesworth,  the  Guerrilla  Girls,  Jenny  Holzer,  Mary  Kelly,  Barbara  Kruger,  Louise  Lawler,  Martha  Rosler,  Cindy  Sherman,  Carrie  Mae  Weems  and  Hannah  Wilke—demanding,  instigating  and  even  physically  embodying  the  enormous  paradigm  shift.The  high  production  values,  visual  slapstick  and  omniscient  narrator  so  fundamental  to  effective  advertising  became  the  stock-in-trade  for  postmodern  art  as  well.  Signal  works  by  many  of  these  artists  functioned  perfectly  as  art-historical  sound  bites,  frequently  reproduced,  often  without  context.  The  large-scale,  black-and-white  Polaroids  in  Lorna  Simpson’s  Stereo  Styles (1988),  for  example,  center  on  the  repeating  image  of  the  artist’s  head  from  behind,  coifed  in  10  different  sculptural  African-American  hairstyles,  paired  with  descriptors  such  as  “long  and  silky,”  “country  fresh,”  “severe”  or  “ageless.”  Epigrammatic  and  indexical,  Stereo  Styles could  be  a  proxy  for  all “identity”  art.  Yet  one  of  the  accomplishments  of  “The  Deconstructive  Impulse”  is  that  it  restores  a  specificity  to  each  artist  while  placing  her  within  a  much  larger  frame  of  reference.Garrulous,  opinionated,  insinuating,  cryptic  or  cutting,  each  work  in  “The  Deconstructive  Impulse”  becomes  part  of  an  obstreperous  dialogue  on  the  nature  of  power  in  all  its  forms.  The  loudest  “voice”  is  that  of  a  brainy,   caustic  girl  stuck  in  the  normative  fantasy  of  “Ozzie  and  Harriet.”  The  generation  of  American  artists  born  during  the  1940s  and  ’50s  were  the  first  to  embrace  critical  theory  as  a  means  of  exposing  and  eviscerating  the  machinations  of  family,  state  and  (especially)  the  corporation.As  an  earlier  generation  of  women  Pop  artists  knew,  the  “problem”  for  women  artists  is  that  they  will  always  be  subject,  object  and  maker  simultaneously.  This  triple  burden  is  borne  lightly  in  Laurie  Simmons’s  life-size  gelatin  silver  print  Walking  House (1989),  in  which  a  model  home  rests  jauntily  atop  Barbie’s  plastic-perfect  gams.  Lynn  Hershman’s  awareness  summoned  “Roberta  Breitmore,”  a  disheveled,  traumatized  alter  ego  that  embodies  a  kind  of  pathetic  or  “failed”  femininity  (present  here  in  a  C-print).  Judith  Barry’s  video  Casual  Shopper (1980–81)  brilliantly  sends  up  shopping  as  both  seduction  and  a  form  of  self-love.  Backed  by  a  throbbing  electronic  beat  (think  porn),  a  man  and  woman  pursue  one  another  through  a  shopping  mall,  riding  escalators,  melting  into  stands  of  mannequins  and  blankly  fondling  the  merchandise  while  checking  their  reflections  in  mirrors.  Shot  in  early  video’s  soft  focus  and  high-key  color,  the  actors  look  like  they  walked  off  the  set  of  “Dynasty”  and  straight  into  the  psychodrama  and  ennui  of  everyday  life.If  the  exhibition  reminds  us  of  how  esthetically  satisfying  the  mechanical  reproduction  can  be,  it  also  revisits  familiar  arguments  about  the  relationship  of  authenticity  to  facture.  In  the  paintings  on  view—among  them  Sturtevant’s  Warhol  Marilyn (1973);  Sherrie  Levine’s  After  Stuart  Davis (1983),  After  Malevich and  After  Joan  Miró (both  1984);  and  Deborah  Kass’s  Read  My  Lips (1990)  and  Before  and  Happily  Ever  After (1991)—the  “hand”  is  used  as  a  means  of  possessing,  impersonating  and  undermining  the  great  male  artist  of  the  modernist  canon.And  then  there’s  the  hand  of  Adrian  Piper.  In  the  “Vanilla  Nightmares”  series  (1986-88),  expressive  charcoal  drawings  of  naked  black  bodies  crawling  over  the  pages  of  the  New  York  Times disrupt  “all  the  news  that’s  fit  to  print.”  The  headlines  forecast  the  demise  of  apartheid,  but  Piper’s  awkwardly  articulated,  intense  renderings  feel  completely  current.  The  Cubists  used  newsprint  to  usher  their  paintings  into  the  Machine  Age;  Piper’s  coupling  of  type  and  hand  tracks  hers  into  the  dirty  underbelly  of  late  capitalism  and  into  contemporary  art,  where  it  remains  ensconced.“The Deconstructive Impulse” travels to the Nasher Museum of Art, Duke University, Durham, N.C., Aug. 24–Dec. 5, and the Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston, Feb. 11–Apr. 19, 2012.Photos: Left, Deborah Kass: Before and Happily Ever After, 1991, oil and acrylic on canvas, 72 by 60 inches., Lorna Simpson: Stereo Styles, 1988, 10 black-and-white Polaroid prints, 247⁄8 by 233⁄4 inches each. Right



