
 


 
Climbing  through  the  five  space  frames  of  Platonic  solids  that  inaugurated  “Anne  Tyng:  Inhabiting  Geometry” was  akin  to  moving  through  a  surreal  playground  celebrating  Euclidian  principles.  Together  with  a  lacy,  spiraling  double  helix  that  stretched  from  floor  to  ceiling,  the  large  models  (approx.  7  feet  per  side)  each  invited  the  visitor  to  enter  into  Tyng’s  singular  architectural  vision.  Custom  fabricated  for  the  show,  these  partially  painted  plywood  forms  accompanied  an  intimate  presentation  of  the  drawings,  documentation  and  models  for  six  of  Tyng’s  projects,  thus  providing  an  accessible  introduction  to  the  theories  and  practice  of  this  significant  yet  overlooked  figure  in  the  history  of  modern  architecture.Anne  Griswold  Tyng  was  born  in  China  to  missionary  parents  in  1920  and  educated  at  Harvard  in  the  early  1940s  before  spending  a  decade  as  an  associate  in  the  Philadelphia  offices  of  Louis  I.  Kahn.  Based  in  Philadelphia  for  50  years,  she  taught  architecture  for  nearly  three  decades  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  until  her  retirement  in  the  late  1990s.  However,  she  is  typically  credited  only  for  her  early  collaboration  with  Kahn  and  as  the  mother  of  their  daughter,  Alexandra.  Her  geometric  vision  clearly  inflected  their  jointly  authored  projects,  such  as  the  skeletal  and  elegant  City  Tower  (1952–57),  represented  here  by  a  dozen  drawings,  a  meticulous  acrylic  model  and  printed  promotional  materials  for  the  unrealized  monument.  Buckminster  Fuller  understood  the  mark  she  left  on  Kahn’s  work,  calling  her  “Kahn’s  geometrical  strategist”  in  a  letter  of  support  for  Tyng  as  the  first  woman  to  be  awarded  a  grant  from  the  Graham  Foundation  in  1965.Tyng’s  application  of  geometry  as  both  a  structuring  and  metaphorical  element  merits  acknowledgment  in  its  own  right.  The  delicate  plans,  elevations  and  models  for  her  ambitious  but  little-known  Urban  Hierarchy  project  (1969–71)  elucidate  how  she  translated  her  love  for  basic  geometric  elements  into  viable  structures  and  systematic  social  solutions  that  are  human  in  scale  and  materiality.  One  model  offers  a  single,  hivelike  unit  whose  clustered  building  blocks  are  populated  by  miniature  inhabitants,  vehicles  and  a  playground,  while  the  other  shows  how  multiple  cylindrical  units  can  fit  together  to  form  a  more  comprehensive  urban  system. Tyng  continues  her  work  today,  extending  and  deepening  her  research  into  the  application  of  the  Fibonacci  sequence  and  Platonic  solids,  first  manifested  in  a  1964  exhibition  at  the  university  that  was  beautifully  evoked  in  19  photographs  at  the  ICA.  The  documentary  component  of  the  show  also  included  recent  notes  and  models  along  with  early  brochures  for  City  Tower,  her  trademark  Tyng  Toy  (a  kit  for  making  children’s  playthings)  and  her  groundbreaking  doctoral  dissertation  (on  the  Fibonacci  proportion).  “Inhabiting  Geometry” will  hopefully  inspire  further  exploration  of  Tyng’s  contributions  to  the  ongoing  discussion  of  socially  driven  architecture,  sustainable  urban  proposals  and  the  role  of  gender  and  psychoanalysis  in  design.[The  show  is  on  view  at  the  Graham  Foundation  in  Chicago  through  June  18.]Photo: View of Anne Tyng’s exhibition “Inhabiting Geometry,” 2011; at the Institute of Contemporary Art.



