
 


 
Sam  Samore’s  carefully  composed  photographs  recently  on  view  at  D’Amelio  Terras  are  a  far  cry  from  “The  Suicidist,”  the  1973  series  for  which  he  is  best  known.  Those  black-and-white  images  depict  the  young  artist  posing  as  if  having  taken  his  own  life,  his  body  sprawled  out  on  a  living-room  floor  with  a  vacuum-cleaner  hose  in  his  mouth,  or  slumped  in  a  desk  chair  after  having  jabbed  himself  with  an  arrow.  This  series,  and  a  group  of  photographs  that  revisited  the  playing-dead  subject  30  years  later,  made  up  Samore’s  first  solo  museum  exhibition  in  the  U.S.,  at  MoMA  PS1  in  2006.Samore  has  always  explored  alternative  ways  of  plotting  narratives,  and  particularly  narratives  that  underscore  what  he  sees  as  the  isolated  human  condition.  The  “Suicidist” images  are  only  one  example  of  this  preoccupation,  which  has  also  materialized  in  shots  of  random  people  on  the  street  that  he  asked  other  photographers  to  take  for  him.  Although  the  images  may  seem  strangely  familiar,  and  we  may  muse  on  their  subjects’  habits,  professions  or  personal  lives,  we  remain  removed  from  the  personalities  behind  the  faces.  At  D’Amelio  Terras,  Samore’s  latest  exploration  of  isolation  appeared  in  a  group  of  fragmented  portraits  of  women  titled  “The  Dark  Suspicion.”The  poet  Max  Henry,  who  has  collaborated  with  Samore,  has  suggested  that  the  artist’s  new  work  treads  painterly  territory  while  his  prior  work  looks  more  cinematic.  For  years  Samore  has  referred  to  his  photographs  as  “paintings”  and  named  Caravaggio  and  Bronzino  among  his  key  influences.  In  “The  Dark  Suspicion”  images,  this  shift  runs  deeper  than  the  bright  blues,  yellows  and  pinks  that  have  replaced  a  black-and-white  palette.  For  whereas  Samore  once  aimed  to  tell  a  more  concrete  story,  he  now  asks  us  to  construct  the  narrative  to  an  extent  traditionally  specific  to  painting.  We  are  not  shown  the  plot,  as  in  films.  Instead,  we  are  left  to  author  it  using  the  lips,  lashes  and  other  fragments  provided.The  Dark  Suspicion  #1 (all  works  2011) is  a  photographic  landscape  of  in-  and  out-of-focus  red  lips  and  eyelids  heavily  coated  with  blue  eyeliner.  Samore’s  life-size  visions  of  women  whose  faces  we  never  see  in  full  are  like  impressions  of  passersby  glimpsed  while  walking  urban  streets.  It  strikes  me  that  this  city  dweller  (the  artist  divides  his  time  among  Bangkok,  Paris  and  New  York)  aims  not  only  to  play  down  the  differences  between  photography  and  painting  but  also  to  create  allegories  for  our  perceptions  of  people  rather  than  to  represent  actual  people—shades  of  women  as  opposed  to  women.The  straight,  red-blonde  hair  and  section  of  a  face  cropped  by  the  picture’s  edge  in The  Dark  Suspicion  #5 may  summon  our  memories  of  an  acquaintance  with  similar  features.  But  what,  Samore  may  be  asking,  can  we  really  conclude  about  this  woman?  And  more  generally,  what’s  in  an  appearance?  With  this  show,  the  artist  continues  to  refine  his  work  to  fewer  but  stronger  touchstones.Photo: Sam Samore: The Dark Suspicion #5, 2011, ink on rag paper, 34 by 60 inches; at D’Amelio Terras.



