
 


Cool  and  distanced  irony,  so  popular  in  late  20th-century  culture,  is  said  to  have  died  in  the  smoke  of  the  World  Trade  Center  attacks  in  2001.  By  that  time,  L.A.-based  Richard  Hawkins  had  been  making  overtly  romantic  and  fanatically  engaged  art  for  at  least  a  decade.  Hawkins  communicates  longing  and  desire  in  his  works  (which  could  be  described  as  operatic  punk),  from  the  “Crepuscule”  sculptures  of  the  early  ’90s—glowing  red  Chinese  lanterns  suspended  from  the  ceiling  and  plastered  with  cutouts  of  sleek  torsos  and  pretty  young  faces—to  the  “Disembodied  Zombies”  of  the  late  ’90s.  The  latter  are  inkjet  prints  of  eerily  beautiful  heads  of  young  male  icons  floating  on  bright  painterly  grounds.  Accessorized  with  the  vacant  gazes  and  dripping  flesh  of  the  undead,  the  images  can  be  read  as  martyred  saints  or  victims  of  crimes  of  passion."Third  Mind,”  Hawkins’s  first  survey  in  the  United  States,  provides  a  welcome  look  at  the  artist’s  practice  over  the  past  two  decades.  Organized  by  Lisa  Dorin,  associate  curator  at  the  Art  Institute  of  Chicago  (where  the  show  premiered  last  fall),  the  exhibition  encompasses  60  works  in  various  mediums,  though  it  focuses  on  the  artist’s  collages  and  assemblages.  Patched  together  with  the  detritus  of  everyday  life,  such  as  magazine  cutouts,  Post-it  notes  and  paper  clips,  Hawkins’s  collaged  works  evidence  his  voracious  appetite  for  culture—his  disparate  subjects  including  Roman  sculpture,  Proust,  Native  American  history  and  rock  stars—and  the  range  of  his  formal  strategies,  from  making  simple  interventions  on  found  materials  to  creating  elaborate,  even  obsessive,  constructions.Some  of  his  collages  incorporate  clippings  from  magazine  pages  that  had  been  used  to  mix  paints  or  wipe  brushes  in  his  studio.  One  of  these,  a  sepia-toned  photo  of  a  young  man,  is  dotted  here  and  there  with  daubs  of  pink  paint,  the  oil  from  which  has  seeped  into  the  paper,  leaving  a  rich  stain.  The  coloration  of  the  image  and  the  model’s  blank-faced  beauty  convey  a  moody  and  romantic  tone  reminiscent  of  a  Russian  novel  from  the  turn  of  an  earlier  century.  Throughout  Hawkins’s  collages,  a  balance  of  chance  and  manipulation,  as  well  as  an  easy  commingling  of  the  sublime  and  the  everyday,  prevails.In  the  Hammer  installation,  works  from  different  series  are  exhibited  side  by  side,  a  strategy  that  draws  out  the  connections  between  them.  In  one  example  of  the  smart  but  subtle  layout,  a  group  of  2009  collages  from  Hawkins’s  series  “Urbis  Paganus”  hangs  near  the  sculpture  House  of  the  Mad  Professor (2008).  The  collages  feature  photographs  of  Roman  statues  cut  from  a  German  art  history  textbook  and  pasted  onto  black  paper,  each  illuminated  by  the  artist’s  handwritten  observations  in  white  script.  The  commentary  reads  like  a   delightful  and  surprising  art  history  lecture,  one  that  could  easily  have  issued  from  the  unseen  protagonist  of  the  sculpture.  This  house,  a  black  rectangular  box  approximately  3  feet  wide  and  set  on  slender  legs,  is  fitted  with  narrow  windows  that  provide  the  only  views  into  its  red-lit  interiors,  each  one  an  orchestration  of  objects  reflected  in  mirrors  placed  inside  the  miniature  rooms.Hawkins’s  works  have  been  arranged  here  to  relate  not  only  to  one  another  but  also  to  historical  works  in  the  museum’s  permanent  collection.  In  an  essay  written  for  the  Hammer  installation,  Dorin  notes  that  Hawkins’s  zombies  play  off  a  19th-century  painting  in  a  nearby  gallery,  stating  that  the  heads  in  the  manipulated  photographs  “serve  as  spectral  stand-ins  for  John  the  Baptist,  whose  infamous  beheading  is  augured  in  Gustave  Moreau’s  Salome  Dancing  Before  Herod (1876).”  Perhaps  it  is  no  accident  that  Hawkins’s  Disembodied  Zombie  Ben  Purple (1997)  relates  to  a  much  different  painting  in  the  collection.  Mary  Cassatt’s  Reine  Lefebvre  and  Margot (1902),  which  can  be  seen  clearly  beyond  the  zombie  print,  shares  more  than  its  pink-toned  palette.  Both  works  point  to  the  fragile  complexity  of  human  emotion—something  so  enduring  it  bridges  the  divide  between  lush  sentiment  and  delicate  gore.“Richard Hawkins—Third Mind” was at the Art Institute of Chicago, Oct. 20, 2010-Jan. 17, 2011, and appears at the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles, Feb. 12–May 22.Photos: Left, view of Richard Hawkins’s exhibition, showing two “Crepuscule” sculptures. Right, Disembodied Zombie Ben Purple, 1997, inkjet print, 47 by 36 inches.



