
 


 
Clocks  abound  in  the  photographic,  filmic  and  sculptural  works  of  Bettina  Pousttchi.  The  German-Iranian  artist’s  “World  Time”  series  (2008-ongoing)  comprises  blown-up,  black-and-white  images  that  capture  clocks  on  buildings  in  various  time  zones  at  exactly  1:55.  At  last  year’s  Art  Basel,  meanwhile,  Pousttchi  photographed  the  timepiece  on  the  facade  of  the  convention  center’s  Hall  2,  then  blew  it  up  and  hung  it  on  the  facade  of  Hall  1,  which  was  subsequently  knocked  down  to  make  room  for  a  new  Herzog  &  de  Meuron  fair  building.  Pousttchi’s  various  clocks  underscore  her  interest  in  time  and  memory,  in  political,  artistic  and  architectural  histories—and  in  photography’s  role  in  documenting  and  creating  all  of  the  above.  So  it  was  no  surprise  that  this  solo  exhibition  of  mostly  recent  work  was  titled  “World  Time  Clock,”  and  that  it  too  was  concerned  with  time’s  myriad  manifestations.The  show’s  centerpiece  was  the  entrancing,  elliptical  video  Conversations  in  the  Studio  #3 (2010),  a  work  that  also  synced  different  moments  in  time.  In  it,  a  filmed  conversation  between  Pousttchi  and  Daniel  Buren  limning  the  differences  between  making  art  in  institutions  and  making  art  “on  the  street”  is  projected  onto  various  surfaces  in  the  Warsaw  atelier  of  the  late  Polish  artist  Edward  Krasinski,  who  famously  filled  that  now-preserved  studio  with  photographs  and  mirrors  that  visually  double  the  space.  Thus,  a  bookshelf  is  only  a  photographic  image  of  the  bookshelf  across  the  room;  a  wall  is  in  fact  a  mirror.  Adding  to  this  hall-of-mirrors  effect  are  Buren’s  signature  vertical  stripes  that  streak  across  one  of  Krasinski’s  studio  windows.  As  the  reliclike  studio  (walls  trellised  with  cracks,  shelves  sagging  with  papers)  becomes  the  very  architectonics  of  the  conversation—a  conversation  about the  studio  projected  on  the  studio—the  video’s  true  brilliance  comes  clear.“Sculpture  Project  Echo”  (2009)  is  a  series  of  color  photographs  documenting  Pousttchi’s  site-specific  outdoor  installation Echo (2009/10),  for  which  the  artist  covered  the  exterior  of  the  Temporary  Kunsthalle  Berlin  with  a  collage  of  archival  images  of  the  Palast  der  Republik.  The  modernist  landmark  served  as  the  GDR’s  parliament  and  was  demolished  in  2009.  The  photos  of  her  own  installation  delineate  the  construction-site-dotted  center  of  Berlin  with  a  remove  that  mimes  the  documentary  impulse  to  record  history.  Equally  self-referencing  was  a  witty  pair  of  early  videos,  which  married  Structuralist  film  concerns  to  campy,  noirish  themes.  Ocularis (1999)  features  a  slow  pull  back  from  a  drop  of  blood  in  a  microscope.  Double  Empire (2000),  meanwhile,  seemingly  offers  the  point  of  view  of  a  freefall  down  the  Empire  State  Building’s  surface,  though  the  camera  actually  moves  upward,  as  becomes  apparent  when  the  night  sky  blossoms  into  view.Opening  and  closing  the  show  were  two  curious  sculptural  series  crafted  from  twisted  crowd-control  barricades.  Double  Monuments  for  Flavin  and  Tatlin (2010)  features  four  pieces  made  of  white  barriers  in  vertical  spirals  with  fluorescent  tubes  at  their  center,  cheekily  referencing  both  Tatlin’s  Constructivist  ode  to  Bolshevism  and  Flavin’s  Minimalist  tubes.  In  Blackout (2007–10)  the  barricades  are  dark  and  lie  horizontally  across  white  plinths.These  sculptures  conjure  up  an  argument  that  Pousttchi  made  to  Buren:  in  the  white  cube,  art  is  the  variable  and  the  space  is  the  constant,  while  in  public  space,  art  is  the  constant  and  the  landscape  becomes  the  variable.  If  their  conflation  of  “public”  materials  and  autonomous  modernist  sculpture  was  clear,  the  works  themselves  paled  (despite  their  heft  and  alarming  number)  next  to  the  deft  and  inspired  films  on  view,  which  elucidated  the  artist’s  concerns  ever  more  nimbly.
Photo: Bettina Pousttchi: Conversations in the Studio #3, 2010, video, 191⁄2  minutes; at Kunsthalle Basel.



