
 


 
In  American  painting  from  Andy  Warhol  to  Christopher  Wool,  the  printed  mark  is  qualified  by  the  painterly  gesture,  the  slippage,  the  glitch,  the  graffito.  These  binaries  have  proved  astonishingly  productive.  Wade  Guyton  extends  this  lineage  so  neatly  he  might  have  been  dreamed  up  by  an  art  historian.  His  medium  is  modern  inkjet  printing;  horizontal  bands  of  inks  that  form  the  structural  basis  of  this  technology  double  as  a  formalist  abstract  structure  as  they  incrementally  darken  white-primed  canvas  ground.  Typically  Guyton’s  work  is  exhibited  in  a  series  of  evenly  spaced,  upright  rectangles,  all  the  same  size,  lining  a  gallery’s  wall  like  elegantly  lowered  blinds.  A  break  in  the  print  run,  a  coerced  slip  in  the  printer’s  regular  feed,  functions  as  a  fissure  of  light,  an  assertion  of  willful  composition  over  the  repetitive  mechanical  process.In  Berlin,  15  vitrines  were  installed,  each  approximately  15  feet  long,  their  white  bodies  and  black  legs  appearing  designed  to  reflect  the  modernist  interior  of  Capitain  Petzel’s  gallery.  Groups  of  what  Guyton  refers  to  as  “drawings”  were  laid  inside  the  vitrines  over  a  grid  of  bright  blue  vinyl  tiles,  which  apparently  replicated  those  on  Guyton’s  kitchen  floor.  The  drawings  are,  in  fact,  Guyton’s  signature  bands  of  ink,  mostly  black,  occasionally  translucent  red  or  yellow,  on  already  printed  sheets  of  paper:  pages  cut,  or  roughly  torn,  from  old  art  catalogues  and  modern  furniture  magazines.  The  inkjet  printing  qualifies  the  appropriated  images—of  Bauhaus  chairs,  Goya  paintings,  tulip  arrangements,  Paul  Klee  sunsets,  Ab-Ex  imitations—by  selectively  obscuring,  erasing  and  staining.  If  a  generic  pattern  is  superimposed  onto  the  particularities  of  the  cultural  past,  active  intervention  also  usurps  the  passivity  of  the  sampled  material.  Guyton  flattens  his  art  historical  references  into  pure  design,  the  satiety  of  satiny  surface.  A  few  sheets  have  been  printed  with  online  ads  for  Apple  computers,  emphasizing—if  you  have  not  already  gotten  the  point—that  the  broad  spread  of  content  homogenizes  the  clippings  as  cultural  commodities.Some  of  the  vitrines  were  left  empty,  tipping  the  installation  toward  decor.  In  a  few,  the  sheets  had  been  swept  aside  into  a  disorderly  pile  in  one  corner.  Guyton  always  retains  a  margin  for  controlled  error,  and  yet  this  disruption  was  as  much  an  element  of  design  as  the  even  distribution  it  contradicted.  A  layout  vocabulary  is  dressed  up  in  gestures  that  resemble  modernist  abstraction,  with  its  transcendental  ambitions.  Inkjet  printing,  borrowed  from  bureaucracy,  is  cast  as  a  metaphor  for  art  as  production.  But  this  apparent  cynicism  never  really  threatens  because  it  is  clearly  no  more  than  a  posture  adopted  by  the  decor,  perhaps  making  it  seem  less  self-indulgent,  more  edifying  to  its  owner.  The  blue  linoleum  tiles  claim  the  drawings  for  a  residential  destination  and  from  a  residential  source,  comprehending  Guyton’s  home,  that  of  his  collectors  and  the  traffic  in  between.  The  gallery  assistant  explained  to  me  that  Guyton’s  work  is  currently  so  salable  that  he  might  as  well  have  a  license  to  print  money.Photo: Wade Guyton: Zeichnungen für ein großes Bild (detail), 2010, vinyl tiles and inkjet prints; at Capitain Petzel.



