

Reviews May 16, 2011
Arian Dylan
Oaxaca,
at Massimo Audiello
by Ann Wilson Lloyd 











Arián  Dylan,  a  26-year-old  native  resident  of  Oaxaca,  uses  scalpels  and  knives  to  carve  intricate  abstract  patterns  and  images  into  the  surfaces  of  found  books  and  magazines.  A  graduate  of  the  National  School  of  Painting,  Sculpture  and  Engraving  in  Mexico  City,  Dylan  has  shown  his  carved  books,  which  he  calls  “Cavidades”  (cavities),  in  solo  and  group  shows  in  Chile,  Spain,  Japan,  Canada  and  the  U.S.
Dylan’s  incising  technique  was  born  when  he  began  cutting  into  the  multihued  layers  of  his  paintings.  Now  he  works  exclusively  with  published  items,  delicately  excavating  the  pages,  creating  clever,  graceful  and  often  humorous  concave  mosaics.  Some  retain  original  images,  like  the  raging  T.  rexes  on  the  cover  of  a  National  Geographic in  an  untitled  work  from  2010,  enhanced  with  bloodred  mouths  and  stormy  skies  from  colors  found  on  buried  pages.  With  most  of  the  cover  sliced  away,  the  dinosaurs  emerge  from  the  depths,  popping  with  texture  and  dimensionality.  The  swirling  grisaille  patterns  cut  into  a  book  of  black-and-white  Mexican  landscape  photographs  (El  insólito  paisaje  Mexicano [unusual  Mexican  landscapes],  2010,  13½  by  13  inches),  on  the  other  hand,  resemble  topographical  maps—well  suited  to  the  book’s  subject  matter.  The  book  has  a  baroque  design  cut  into  its  cover,  creating  a  decorative  shadowboxlike  frame.  This  piece  was  one  of  the  show’s  most  complex  and  lyrical.
A  series  called  “Las  virgen  Buda”  from  2009  features  the  Virgin  of  Guadalupe  in  the  lotus  position.  These  were  executed  on  blank  13½-by-13-inch  books,  commissioned  for  the  works,  with  thick,  creamy  pages.  While  lovely,  and  done  with  meticulous,  laserlike  cuts  down  to  the  Virgin’s  tiny  fingernails,  they  lack  the  subtle  irony  and  surprise  of  the  found-publication  works.
Another  2009  multipart  piece  is  literal  but  witty.  On  the  face  of  each  of  17  identical  copies  of  Pintura  contemporánea,  a  small  paperback  handbook  on  painting—a  sort  of  Cliff’s  Notes  on  Modernism  in  Spanish—Dylan  has  carved  out  tiny  collages  and  abstractions,  exposing  recognizable  bits  and  pieces  from  the  20th-century  canon.  As  you  study  the  compositions,  each  gradually  transforms  itself  into  a  modernist  Rorschach  test.  Or  a  haunting  fever  dream  of  art  history  class.
Photo: Arián Dylan: Untitled, 2010, altered magazine, 10 by 7 inches; at Massimo Audiello.

